National News in Brief


“The number of the prison population in Kazakhstan reduced by 4 percent,” Kazakh Deputy Prosecutor General Zhakip Assanov said at the Dec. 12 second forum on prison reforms titled, “Employment in Prisons 2017.” “The courts began to use alternative types of punishment more often. In 2014, their share was 65 percent and the deprivation of freedom measure was 35 percent. This is the historically low indicator for the country’s history, including the Soviet period. We are going to use prison as the last choice as the international standards dictate. This year by 26 percent, courts more often released people on parole or used alternative measures to replace the deprivation of freedom. The number of settlements before trial increased four times,” Assanov said. Besides, he noted that the number of settlements was 10,000 in 2012 and in 2014 this number reached 40,000. In addition, the number of arrests during investigations reduced by 11 percent because prosecutors more often began to choose bail instead of arrest. “According to the forecast, the index of the country [in the relevant international ratings] has to climb up 10 positions in two years, from 30th place to 40th. In 2014, the prison population reduced by 1,953 people or 3 percent,” Assanov noted.
 

On the threshold of Independence Day, Minister of Defence Imangali Tasmagambetov congratulated the personnel of the Armed Forces of Kazakhstan on Dec. 15 on the significant date in the history of the development of Kazakh statehood and awarded state decorations to the servicemen on behalf of President Nursultan Nazarbayev. Kazakh Deputy Minister of Defence Major General Talgat Mukhtarov and Combatant Commander of the Vostok Regional Command Reserve Major General Murat Bektanov were presented with Danq orders of the second degree. Head of the Combat Training Department of the Headquarters of the Kazakh Armed Forces Colonel Khairulla Ilyasov and head of the Military Engineering Institute of Radio Electronic and Communication Colonel Kairat Sadykov were presented with Aibyn orders of the second degree. In addition, Commander and head of the headquarters of military unit 21751 Colonel Yerlan Nauanov and Colonel Denis Gorbunov were awarded posthumously with Aibyn orders of the second degree. Colonel Kairat Akhmetov was awarded with the Kurmet order for professionalism and excellent serving. Some servicemen were awarded with Yerligi Ushin and Zhauyngerlik Erligi Ushin medals. More than 20 servicemen were given accelerated promotions.
 

A Dec. 15 meeting dedicated to Kazakh Independence Day was held in the General Prosecutor’s Office in Astana. Addressing the meeting, Prosecutor General Askhat Daulbayev emphasised the importance of independence for Kazakhstan, the success reached by the country over the period of independence, the role of Kazakhstan’s First President Nursultan Nazarbayev in the establishment of statehood and the enhanced public and political role of prosecution authorities as one of the main legal institutes of the country. By decree of the President, a number of prosecution officers were presented with state awards for excellent performance in the duty, courage and dedication displayed when ensuring law and order and strengthening the national security and defensive capacity of the country. Chairman of the Committee for Legal Statistics and Social Records of the General Prosecutor’s Office Saule Aitpayeva and Prosecutor of Karaganda Region Askar Sekishev were awarded Danq orders of the second degree. First Deputy Prosecutor of South Kazakhstan Region Batyrzhan Zhanibekov and Deputy Prosecutor of Aktobe Region Zhaiylkhan Mukhamedyarov were awarded Aibyn orders of the second degree. Head of the prosecutor’s administration of Almaty Azamat Alibekov, Deputy Prosecutor of East Kazakhstan Region Nurlan Bizhanov, First Deputy Prosecutor of Almaty Berik Zhuiriktayev, Prosecutor of the Zhalagash District of the Kyzylorda Region Khatisha Zhumagulova and others were awarded medals For Military Valour. Head of the department of the General Prosecutor’s Office Timur Issanov, deputy head of the department of the General Prosecutor’s Office Galymzhan Koigeldiyev, head of the Prosecution Administration of West Kazakhstan Region Natalya Kolpakova and others were presented with certificates of merit. The prosecutor general congratulated all awardees and wished everyone success in fulfilment of their duties on ensuring law and order in the country.

